.TH QSEXEC 1 "April 2018" "mod_qos utilities 11.54" "qsexec man page

.SH NAME
qsexec \- parses the data received via stdin and executes the defined command on a pattern match.

.SH SYNOPSIS
qsexec \-e <pattern> [\-t <number>:<sec>] [\-c <pattern> [<command string>]] [\-p] [\-u <user>] <command string> 
.SH DESCRIPTION
qsexec reads log lines from stdin and searches for the defined pattern. It executes the defined command string on pattern match. 
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-e <pattern> 
Specifes the search pattern causing an event which shall trigger the command. 
.TP
\-t <number>:<sec> 
Defines the number of pattern match within the the defined number of seconds in order to trigger the command execution. By default, every pattern match causes a command execution. 
.TP
\-c <pattern> [<command string>] 
Pattern which clears the event counter. Executes optionally a command if an event command has been executed before. 
.TP
\-p 
Writes data also to stdout (for piped logging). 
.TP
\-u <name> 
Become another user, e.g. www\-data. 
.TP
<command string> 
Defines the event command string where $0\-$9 are substituted by the submatches of the regular expression. 
.SH EXAMPLE
Executes the deny.sh script providing the IP address of the client causing a mod_qos(031) messages whenever the log message appears 10 times within at most one minute: 
  ErrorLog "|qsexec \-e \\'mod_qos\\(031\\).*, c=([0\-9a\-zA\-Z:.]*)\\' \-t 10:60 \\'/bin/deny.sh $1\\'"

.SH SEE ALSO
qsfilter2(1), qsgeo(1), qsgrep(1), qshead(1), qslog(1), qslogger(1), qspng(1), qsrotate(1), qssign(1), qstail(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Pascal Buchbinder, http://mod-qos.sourceforge.net/
